The Al-Azhar Park is one of the foremost public parks in Egypt, found in Cairo City, and it is recorded as one of the world's sixty incredible open parks by the Public Spaces Venture. The Historic Cities Support Program made it with the help of The Aga Khan Trust for Culture. Once a rundown region in Cairo, it has undergone a miraculous change and is a popular tourist destination in Egypt.

The Park includes more than two million trees and plants. It is situated in an excellent location with dazzling views, and the best shaded walkways. It has a large play area for children and families to appreciate their holiday and have a fantastic time. Al-Azhar Park covers a range of 80 acres of land, and it was named after the iconic Al-Azhar Mosque, the oldest surviving Fatimid landmark in Egypt.

Al-Azhar Park is a popular spot for locals and tourists alike. It is a place where people can relax, enjoy the scenery, and breathe fresh air.

Al-Azhar Park is a public park situated on the edge of the historic Darb al-Ahmar district in Cairo, Egypt. It was built on a former garbage dump site and opened in 2005.

The Park was designed by the French landscape architect Jacques Greber, who also designed the Park's master plan. The Park cost an estimated US$30 million to build and was funded by the Aga Khan Trust For Culture Foundation and the Egyptian government.

The Park has been praised for its design and role in revitalizing the surrounding area. The Park has also been a venue for several events like concerts and theatre shows.

While the excavation of the Park was still going on, a 1.5 km piece of a wall that reached a depth of 15 meters was found beneath the mountains of trash. The towers and wall of the long-forgotten Ayyubid Wall of Cairo were unveiled. It became clear that the newly discovered gem was important to the park project. The stone wall, which had been buried for centuries, had undergone a lot of deterioration, including flaking and disaggregation.

Two former eastern city gates, Bab al-Barqiyya and Bab al-Mahruq, were among the structures uncovered and restored. The uncovered wall segment can be shown to constitute a uniform piece of construction. It comprises a few repeating elements, such as round-fronted towers and curtain walls, and is consistent in its use of materials. The walls are adorned and punctuated by crenulations, arrow slits, stairwells, and chambers.

Al-Azhar Park is renowned for its Neo-Islamic architectural style and features several elements characteristic of this style. The most notable feature of the Park is the geometric al-Azhar Garden. 

Overall, the architectural style of Al-Azhar Park reflects the Islamic influences in Cairo. The Park is planned in a way that is both aesthetically pleasing and functional, making it a popular spot for local people and visitors alike.

