Akhenaten, was a king (1353–36 BCE) of ancient Egypt of the 18th dynasty, who established a new cult dedicated to the Aton, the sun’s disk (hence his assumed name, Akhenaten, meaning “beneficial to Aton”).

Early reign
Few scholars now agree with the contention that Amenhotep III associated his son Amenhotep IV on the throne for several years of coregency; it is assumed here, in accordance with general scholarly consensus, that the older king died before his son gained power. At or shortly after the time of his accession, Amenhotep IV seems to have married the chief queen of his reign, Nefertiti. The earliest monuments of Amenhotep IV depict the traditional worship of deities executed according to the artistic style of the preceding reign—with the exception of a prominent role accorded to the falcon-headed god Re-Harakhte, who is given an unusual epithet containing the phrase “who rejoices in his horizon, in his aspect of the light which is in the sun’s disk.”

Akhenaton and Nefertiti under the sun god Aton
King Akhenaton (left) with Queen Nefertiti and three of their daughters under the rays of the sun god Aton, Egypt, mid-14th century BCE; in the State Museums, Berlin.
Within the first few years of his rule, Amenhotep IV introduced sweeping changes in the spheres of religion, architecture, and art (see Amarna style). Near the main precinct of the god Amon at Karnak, he founded several new temples dedicated to Re-Harakhte, who was now provided with a lengthy epithet placed in two royal cartouches and was described as “the light which is in the sun’s disk (aton).” Moreover, the new god, Aton, was no longer portrayed in anthropomorphic form but as the sun’s disk itself, elevated to the heavens and extending its multiple rays down over the royal family. Each ray ended in a tiny hand with which the Aton might offer the sign of life to the king and queen or even embrace their limbs and crowns.

Unlike the traditional ritual prescribed for most Egyptian deities, which was carried out in small, darkened sanctuaries in the innermost recesses of their temples, Amenhotep IV’s devotion to the Aton was celebrated through the presentation of foodstuffs on large numbers of offering tables and made in open sunlight. The Aton temples at Karnak therefore consisted of a series of vast open-air courts in which there was virtually no interior space at all. The only preserved architecture from Karnak indicates that these courts were flanked by roofed porticos with colossal statues of the king placed against the pillars. The new temples were built entirely of relatively small blocks of sandstone of uniform size, known as talatat, apparently for speed in construction—an understandable convenience, considering the scale of the project. The walls were decorated with reliefs executed entirely in sunk relief, a method well-suited for exterior surfaces exposed to direct sunlight. The scenes, reconstructed from thousands of individual talatat blocks, portray the royal couple and their eldest daughter, Meritaton, engaged primarily in making offerings to the Aton, although scenes of offering-bearers, cattle designated for slaughter, foreigners in obeisance, and detailed depictions of the royal palace are also abundant. One series of reliefs shows Amenhotep IV at the celebration of his jubilee, a ceremony normally observed by kings of the New Kingdom (c. 1539–1075 BCE) only beginning in their 30th regnal year. One temple at Karnak shows only Nefertiti as the primary officiant before the Aton, sometimes accompanied by Meritaton—an unprecedented privilege for a mere queen. In addition, the enormous expanse of the exterior temple wall provided a stone canvas on which experiments in large-scale composition were undertaken.

The introduction of a new cult was accompanied by innovations in the portrayal of the human form in both relief and sculpture. The royal family was depicted with features that, by comparison with standard conventions of Egyptian art, appear noticeably exaggerated: a prognathous jaw, a thin neck, sloped shoulders, a pronounced paunch, large hips and thighs, and spindly legs. Facial features were characterized by angular, slitted eyes, fleshy lips, nasolabial wrinkles, and holes for ear plugs, while the princesses are often each depicted with an inflated, egg-shaped cranium. Much scholarly debate has centred on whether these features reflect the actual appearance of the king—extended by convention to his family and retainers—and various theories have been argued about the presumed pathology of Amenhotep IV and what medical conditions might produce the anatomical traits shown. The Karnak colossi in particular show these new characteristics in notably exaggerated form, including one that apparently depicts the king without male genitalia. Whether such statues were intended to represent the male and female element combined in the person of the divine king or whether they are simply statues of Nefertiti has not been satisfactorily settled. More simply, the remarkable innovations of Amenhotep IV in several cultural spheres at once may be reasonably viewed as a manifestation of the intimate connection in Egyptian culture between art and religion. In devising a radically different cult based on the worship of the sun’s natural form, the king was forced to develop a new artistic idiom with which to express it. That Amenhotep IV was personally involved in these changes seems clear: the biographical text of one of the reign’s master sculptors indicates that he was instructed by the king himself.

Move to Akhetaton
In the fifth year of his reign, the king changed his name from Amenhotep (“Amon Is Content”) to Akhenaten (“Beneficial to Aton”). Nefertiti’s name was expanded to Neferneferuaten (“Beautiful Is the Beauty of Aton”)-Nefertiti. That same year Akhenaten moved his capital to a new site some 200 miles (300 km) north of Thebes. The location chosen for the new capital, named Akhetaton (“Horizon of the Aton”; Tell el-Amarna), was a virgin site on the east bank of the Nile River, a large desert embayment enclosed by limestone cliffs, in which a series of boundary stelae were carved. The boundary texts, dated the fifth, sixth, and eighth years of his rule, describe the planned city in some detail and reveal Akhenaten’s primary intention: to construct a city dedicated to the worship of the Aton separate from already established cults.

Construction began apace on a new series of royal residences and open-air temples, the latter built entirely from limestone talatat and decorated in a manner similar to that of their predecessors at Karnak. The central city was built around the vast main temple to the Aton, called Gempaaton, and a secondary sanctuary, called the Mansion of the Aton. A large formal palace connected to a royal estate by means of a bridge over the main north-south road was located nearby. The road itself led to a northern palace and a riverside settlement laid out along the northern limits of Akhetaton. The royal and religious structures of the central city were surrounded with administrative offices, storerooms, and workshops, as well as extensive suburbs of private villas and smaller private houses. To the far south a separate garden enclosure, called the Maru-Aton, was built, and it seems to have provided a place of recreation for the royal family. The site of Tell el-Amarna provides invaluable insight into the city layout and domestic architecture of ancient Egypt, and yet it remains very much an atypical settlement, because of its programmatic foundation and its situation on the edge of the desert rather than in the cultivation.

Private tombs for the officials of Akhenaten’s court were built in the northern and southern cliffs to the east, although ultimately none were completed or ever used for burial. The royal tomb, intended for Akhenaten, Nefertiti, and his daughters, was carved in a large wadi east of the city. Not far from the outlet of the royal wadi, the remains of a village for workmen were discovered, apparently the domestic quarters for those skilled craftsmen engaged in cutting and decorating the royal tomb.

One of the most important discoveries from Tell el-Amarna was a cache of clay tablets originating in the records office of the central city, referred to as the Amarna Letters. Written in an archaic and somewhat provincialized form of Babylonian cuneiform, the tablets represent part of the correspondence between the Egyptian court and other states and vassals of the ancient Middle East. They provide invaluable insight into the nature of diplomatic relations between the great nations and petty states of the 14th century BCE as well as an incomplete and tantalizing hint of the strategic maneuvering of the time. Letters from the great powers (Babylonia, Assyria, Mitanni, and the Hittite court) are often preoccupied with the exchange of gifts and diplomatic marriages. Those from the vassal states of Syro-Palestine deal with the local political and military situation and are often filled with complaints of inattention on the part of the Egyptian court. These communications have been used as the basis for the conclusion that Akhenaten had adopted a pacifist attitude toward the Egyptian empire in Asia, but, considering the selective nature of the letters and the lack of direct evidence from the Levant, such judgments may in fact be premature.

In addition to Nefertiti, two other queens appear at Akhetaton: the king’s mother, Tiy, and a secondary wife of Akhenaten, called Kiya, who bears a distinctive epithet, quite different from Nefertiti’s, incorporating the phrase “the (king’s) greatly beloved wife.” While Tiy seems to have died during her son’s reign, the fate of Kiya is unclear, although her name at the Maru-Aton was usurped by that of the eldest princess, Meritaton.

Religion of the Aton
The religious tenets Akhenaten espoused in his worship of the Aton are not spelled out in detail anywhere. They must be reconstructed largely from the iconography of the temple reliefs and stelae that depict him with his deity and from the one lengthy religious text from Tell el-Amarna, the Aton Hymn, preserved in several of the private tombs. In myriad offering scenes preserved from Karnak and Tell el-Amarna, Akhenaten is not portrayed face-to-face with his god, as traditional offering practices would dictate, but lifting up offerings to the sun’s disk in the heaven, which bathes him in its rays. Although the Aton is depicted as the physical manifestation of the sun, his name is nonetheless placed within cartouches, a distinction typical of royalty rather than divinity, and he is said to be “one who is in his jubilee,” a celebration normally reserved for kings. The reciprocal dialogues between king and deity—which regularly appear in traditional temple scenes and which validate the blessings uttered by the gods—are not feasible in Akhenaten’s religion, in which the primary deity has no mouth to speak. Temple texts are thus confined almost entirely to the names and titles of the Aton and those of Akhenaten and his family, who are often shown together on offering stelae from private villas.

The Aton Hymn itself is largely a forceful description of natural effects. It describes the solar disk as the prime mover of life, whose daily rising rejuvenates all living things on earth and at whose setting all creatures go to sleep. While the Aton is said to have created the world for men, it seems that the ultimate goal of creation is really the king himself, whose intimate and privileged connection to his god is emphasized. Divine revelation and knowability are reserved for Akhenaten alone, and the hymn is ultimately neutral in regard to explicating the mysteries of divinity. The hymn has certain passages that are shared by a wider literary tradition and are not unique to Akhenaten; some have similarities to Psalm 104 (see Psalms).

Amon and Taharqa
Granite statue of Amon in the form of a ram protecting King Taharqa, 25th dynasty, 690–664 BCE.
At some point after his fifth regnal year, Akhenaten initiated a program to erase the name and image of the Theban god, Amon, from all monuments, a decision that wreaked widespread destruction in many Egyptian temples. The reason for this drastic step is not known; at some point, it seems that other gods were attacked as well, including Amon’s consort, Mut, and the plural word gods.

Although Akhenaten has been considered by some as the world’s first monotheist, the religion of the Aton may best be described as monolatry, the worship of one god in preference to all others. In fact, Akhenaten’s god consistently incorporated multiple aspects of the traditional divinized sun, such as Re-Harakhte (the rising sun), Shu (atmosphere and sunlight), and Maat (daughter of Re). Whether his beliefs ever took hold in the public imagination, or even among the residents of Akhetaton itself, remains uncertain. Private homes, as well as the workmen’s village, have yielded numerous figurines of household deities, and stelae dedicated to traditional deities, such as Isis and Tausret, have been found in some of the private chapels. Certainly there is no evidence that Akhenaten’s idiosyncratic religion survived his death.

Al-Jizah. Giza Necropolis, Giza Plateau, Cairo, Egypt. Side view of Sphinx with the Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) rising in the background. The sides of all three of the Giza pyramids are astronomically oriented to be north-south, east-west (see notes)
Britannica Quiz
Pop Quiz: 18 Things to Know About Ancient Egypt
Last events of the reign
Toward the end of his reign, Akhenaten is shown on certain monuments together with another king, whose coronation name was Ankhkheperure and whose personal name was Neferneferuaten, the initial element of Nefertiti’s own name. Whether this personage is in fact a new male coregent whose origin cannot now be traced or whether it is Nefertiti herself elevated to the status of male pharaoh remains a controversial issue. This king’s personal name, Neferneferuaton, was then changed to Smenkhkare, the name by which he is more widely known. Akhenaten seems to have ruled with Smenkhkare until Akhenaten’s death in his 17th regnal year, when he was presumably buried in the royal tomb at Akhetaton; Smenkhkare then seems to have had an independent rule of perhaps three years, although Smenkhkare’s biographical and regnal details remain unclear. The city that Akhenaten founded did not long survive; jar dockets from Akhetaton indicate that the site was abandoned by the third regnal year of his son and successor, Tutankhamun.

Legacy
Akhenaten’s rule may be seen as a brief rent in the fabric of Egyptian civilization, in which an idiosyncratic and short-lived royal cult was officially mandated, as was the foundation of an ephemeral royal capital and far-reaching effects in the areas of monumental art. There is little doubt that the major tenets of the Aton religion and the concomitant changes in artistic style were personally initiated by Akhenaten himself, justly earning him the sobriquet of “history’s first individual”—if not the first monotheist. Although the Aton cult quickly disappeared after the death of its inventor, a number of Akhenaten’s stylistic innovations were adopted into the artistic repertoire of later craftsmen, and the large-scale compositions of the Amarna period may be seen as predecessors of later Ramesside battle and festival reliefs.