Saqqara
Located south of Cairo, Saqqara was the vast necropolis of the Ancient Egyptian capital, Memphis, and is home to the nation's oldest pyramid: the Step Pyramid of Djoser.

Aside from being home to Egypt's oldest pyramid, Saqqara is the largest archaeological site in the country. Nobles were laid to rest here over a period of around 3500 years, particularly when nearby Memphis was the capital city, and the enormous ancient burial ground is littered with other smaller pyramids, tombs, and funerary complexes.

Step Pyramid of Djoser
Built by Imhotep - one of the first recognized architects in history - during the reign of Pharaoh Djoser around 2630 BCE, the Step Pyramid was the central feature of the Third Dynasty ruler's funerary complex, which also includes an impressive hypostyle entry hall.

Over 200 feet (60 m) tall, with a base of 358 feet by 397 feet (109 m by 121 m), the step pyramid was the Egyptian's first successful attempt to build a pyramid and is one of the world's oldest monumental cut stone structures.

Djoser's Pyramid is essential both as a feat of engineering in itself and for having paved the way for the construction of the "true pyramids" of Giza and the rest of Egypt.

Visiting Saqqara
The oldest pyramid in Egypt is definitely worth a visit, right? The vast necropolis is home to eleven pyramids in total - the burial places of the Old Kingdom pharaohs - amongst which several are magnificent examples of ancient art and architecture. The Mastaba of Ti is decorated with highly detailed scenes of daily life in the Old Kingdom, as well as a life-size statue of the Pharaoh Ti; while the Serapeum, the burial place of sacred bulls, is also a fascinating highlight.

For big fans of Egyptian history and architecture, be sure to visit the Imhotep Museum too, a small but interesting collection of beautiful ancient objects found around Saqqara.

If you're short on time or don't want to have to worry about organizing your own transport, an easy option is to reserve a guided tour that includes transfers and entrance fees to the main monuments of Saqqara, Memphis, and Giza:

Pyramids of Giza, Memphis, and Saqqara