Ras Mohammed National Park is the most famous national park in Egypt and one of the most famous dive sites in the world.

It is located at the meeting point of the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba, at the southern end of Sinai, about 20 km south of Sharm El Sheikh. Ras Mohammed Park is a park in the desert and includes 2 islands, Tiran and Sanafir, these two extraordinary islands for their beauty of nature and the serenity of the sea and the center of fun is located in Tiran and Sanafir where you can see and feel a new experience with exceptional relaxation in the holiday.

Ras Mohamed National Park was built in 1983 and covers 480 square kilometers and is a very different and unique park because it has a unique ecosystem in the world to observe.

The park is located on a cape on the Red Sea Riviera, the southern peninsula of Sinai, at its farthest south patch.

It covers an area of ​​460 square kilometers, of which the inland part is 133 square kilometers. However, only 12 percent of the area is made available to tourists.

The waters of Ras Mohmmad hide wonderful coral reefs – there are a total of about 150 species of coral.

They have great conditions for development, because strong sea currents bring, among others, huge amounts of plankton they feed on. There are over a thousand species of fish, including small and colorful ones like from cartoons, but also huge sharks and tuna.

In addition, there are about 40 species of starfish, 100 species of sea urchins, 25 species of mollusks, and about 150 species of crustaceans.

You can also meet sea turtles and dolphins. On land and in the air, due to the high temperature and rocky-sand substrate, the fauna is not so rich anymore, and the animals and birds are mainly foxes, lizards, eagles, falcons, and hawks.

The arid desert terrain by sand dunes, mangrove lakes, gravel plains, desert bays, fossil corals, and granite mountains and is home to numerous animal and bird species: Dorcas gazelles, Nubian ibexes, and red foxes, as well as terns, herons, seagulls, and ospreys.

The underwater ecosystem is a wonderful explosion of life: about two hundred species of corals, a thousand species of fish, forty-five species of starfish, winds of hedgehogs, about one hundred mollusks, two hundred crustaceans, and only two species of turtles, the green turtle and the hawk-beak turtle.

Ras Mohamed National Park is known worldwide for the extraordinary beauty of its coral reef, considered one of the most spectacular in the world. Throughout the Marine Park, there are many sites offering spectacular dives such as Shark, Ras Ghazolani, Jackfish Alley, Za’atar, and Yolanda.

The reason why they named the park the Ras Mohammed National Park since it has a shape of a triangle head and its base formed by the series of mountains of South Sinai, and others say that because of its nature which is composed of sea and mountains and desert, it took the shape of a man has a beard.

Be sure to admire the mangroves, which have adapted to live in saltwater, so that their roots are covered with a thick crust of dried salt.

They look plain, but such a will to live commands respect. Visit the Magic Bay, which rivals the Dead Sea in salinity.

It is believed that the salt and mud of the bay are medicinal (the corresponding souvenirs are sold in the reserve), water makes wishes come true if you manage to immerse yourself in it completely, with your head (aha, try, salt stubbornly pushes back), and you cannot take a picture of a magical place from a satellite.

There are enough attractions, just have time to look around. Then, perhaps, you will be lucky enough to see animals and birds living in the reserve.

Snorkeling is prohibited near some of the reefs of Ras Mohammed due to the strong underwater currents. Of course, the recommendations of local dive masters are worth listening to.

The coral reefs of the reserve are simply amazing: they are real seamounts, with a vast plateau and steep cliffs somewhere in the invisible distance.

Whichever dive point you choose – Eel Garden, Anemone City, just a blooming garden at a depth of 14 m!, Yolanda Reef, Shark Reef, Shark Observatory (Shark Observatory) or one of the other amazing creations of nature, the underwater world of the park will overwhelm you.

In order not to accidentally cut yourself, it is better to go down with your shoes on, and in order to see as many fish living between the corals as possible, it is worth choosing the afternoon for diving, when the flow of tourists subsides a little.

Equipment can be rented here, in the reserve, or you can order a set for yourself when buying a tour. Those who dive for the first time will receive a special certificate after that.

And absolutely everyone who has been underwater in Ras Mohammed National Park will see a fantastic and truly unique sight.

Entrance and entry to the territory of the Ras Mohammed national park are paid. In the tourist center, located just off the main road, you can buy a guide to the reserve, albeit in English.

There is a separate zone in the park where we can find tourist information, restaurants and shops. There are also rangers there, who provide tourists with all the information and make sure that the rules are followed.

Each person who comes here must be aware that in the park it is not allowed to litter, collect living and dead organisms, touch corals, feed animals, or catch fish outside the designated places. It is also forbidden to enter closed areas, as well as diving and mooring outside the designated places.

Despite the fact that the park is located only 25 km from Sharm el-Sheikh, you will not be able to get there on your own by public transport.

The only way out, if you want a private trip, is to take a taxi or rent a car. The trip will take about 30 minutes. Taking a taxi, immediately stipulate what time you need to come to pick you up to take you back to the hotel.

The option of renting a car will be especially useful for those who want to stay in Ras Mohammed for the night. The reserve has a camping area, you can spend the night and admire the corals again the next day.

We recommend you to prune a professional camera to take pictures of the rare animals that you cannot find anywhere in the world, this is a very different and unique thing that can distinguish the park from any other park in the world.

Finally, if you are passionate about nature and you like to dive and spend your Christmas holiday in front of the sea, the national park is the most suitable choice for a person who wants to breathe the serene air.

The easiest and best way to get to Ras Mohammed is by taking an excursion from a tour operator. Many prefer to travel overland to see Allah’s Gate (the entrance to the reserve), a mangrove grove, a tectonic rift, and other interesting places.

