Tutankhamun (flourished 14th century BCE) king of ancient Egypt (reigned 1333–23 BCE), known chiefly for his intact tomb, KV 62 (tomb 62), discovered in the Valley of the Kings in 1922. During his reign, powerful advisers restored the traditional Egyptian religion and art, both of which had been set aside by his predecessor Akhenaten, who had led the “Amarna revolution.” (See Amarna style.)

The parentage of Tutankhaten—as he was originally known—remains uncertain, although a single black fragment originating at Akhetaton (Tell el-Amarna), Akhenaten’s capital city, names him as a king’s son in a context similar to that of the princesses of Akhenaten. Medical analysis of Tutankhaten’s mummy shows that he shares very close physical characteristics with the mummy discovered in KV 55 (tomb 55) of the Valley of the Kings. Some scholars identify these remains as those of Smenkhkare, who seems to have been coregent with Akhenaten in the final years of his reign; others have suggested the mummy may be Akhenaten himself.

Al-Jizah. Giza Necropolis, Giza Plateau, Cairo, Egypt. Side view of Sphinx with the Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) rising in the background. The sides of all three of the Giza pyramids are astronomically oriented to be north-south, east-west (see notes)
Britannica Quiz
Pop Quiz: 18 Things to Know About Ancient Egypt
Tutankhamun; Ankhesenamen
Tutankhamun; Ankhesenamen
King Tutankhamun and Queen Ankhesenamen, detail from the back of the throne of Tutankhamun; in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
With the death of Smenkhkare, the young Tutankhaten became king, and was married to Akhenaten’s third daughter, Ankhesenpaaton (later known as Ankhesenamen), probably the eldest surviving princess of the royal family. Because at his accession he was still very young, the elderly official Ay, who had long maintained ties with the royal family, and the general of the armies, Horemheb, served as Tutankhaten’s chief advisers.

By his third regnal year Tutankhaten had abandoned Akhetaton and moved his residence to Memphis, the administrative capital, near modern Cairo. He changed his name to Tutankhamun and issued a decree restoring the temples, images, personnel, and privileges of the old gods. He also began the protracted process of restoring the sacred shrines of Amon, which had been severely damaged during his father’s rule. No proscription or persecution of the Aton, Akhenaten’s god, was undertaken, and royal vineyards and regiments of the army were still named after the Aton.

In addition to a palace built at Karnak and a memorial temple in western Thebes, both now largely vanished, the chief extant monument of Tutankhamun is the Colonnade of the Temple of Luxor, which he decorated with reliefs depicting the Opet festival, an annual rite of renewal involving the king, the three chief deities of Karnak (Amon, Mut, and Khons), and the local form of Amon at Luxor.

Valley of the Kings: Tutankhamun's tomb
Valley of the Kings: Tutankhamun's tomb
Tutankhamun's tomb (lower left) in the Valley of the Kings, near Luxor (ancient Thebes), Egypt.
Tutankhamun unexpectedly died in his 19th year. In 2010 scientists found traces of malaria parasites in his mummified remains and posited that malaria in combination with degenerative bone disease may have been the cause of death. Whatever the case, he died without designating an heir and was succeeded by Ay. He was buried in a small tomb hastily converted for his use in the Valley of the Kings (his intended sepulchre was probably taken over by Ay). Like other rulers associated with the Amarna period—Akhenaten, Smenkhkare, and Ay—he was to suffer the posthumous fate of having his name stricken from later king lists and his monuments usurped, primarily by his former general, Horemheb, who subsequently became king. Although Tutankhamun’s tomb shows evidence of having been entered and briefly plundered, the location of his burial was clearly forgotten by the time of the 20th dynasty (1190–1075 BCE), when craftsmen assigned to work on the nearby tomb of Ramses VI built temporary stone shelters directly over its entrance. The tomb was preserved until a systematic search of the Valley of the Kings by the English archaeologist Howard Carter revealed its location in 1922.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content.
Subscribe Now
Tutankhamun: pectoral
Tutankhamun: pectoral
Pectoral of gold, silver, and semiprecious stones, from the tomb of Tutankhamun, c. 1340 BCE; in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
headrest; Tutankhamun tomb
headrest; Tutankhamun tomb
Headrest in the form of the god Shu with two crouching lions, from the tomb of Tutankhamun, c. 1340 BCE; in the collection of the Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
jewelry; Tutankhamun
jewelry; Tutankhamun
Elaborately detailed pectoral from the tomb of Tutankhamun, c. 1340 BCE; in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
Tutankhamun: dagger
Tutankhamun: dagger
This dagger from the tomb of King Tutankhamun was made from iron from a meteorite, gold, and crystal.
Inside his small tomb, the king’s mummy lay within a nest of three coffins, the innermost of solid gold, the two outer ones of gold hammered over wooden frames. On the king’s head was a magnificent golden portrait mask, and numerous pieces of jewelry and amulets lay upon the mummy and in its wrappings. The coffins and stone sarcophagus were surrounded by four text-covered shrines of hammered gold over wood, which practically filled the burial chamber. The other rooms were crammed with furniture, statuary, clothes, chariots, weapons, staffs, and numerous other objects. But for his tomb, Tutankhamun has little claim to fame; as it is, he is perhaps better known than any of his longer-lived and better-documented predecessors and successors. His renown was secured after the highly popular “Treasures of Tutankhamun” exhibit traveled the world in the 1960s and ’70s. The treasures are housed at the Grand Egyptian Museum in Giza, Egypt.