Library of Alexandria, the most famous library of Classical antiquity. It formed part of the research institute at Alexandria in Egypt that is known as the Alexandrian Museum (Mouseion, “shrine of the Muses”).

Libraries and archives were known to many ancient civilizations in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Syria, Asia Minor, and Greece, but the earliest such institutions were of a local and regional nature, primarily concerned with the conservation of their own particular traditions and heritage. The idea of a universal library, like that of Alexandria, arose only after the Greek mind had begun to envisage and encompass a larger worldview. The Greeks were impressed by the achievements of their neighbours, and many Greek intellectuals sought to explore the resources of their knowledge. There is literary evidence of Greek individuals visiting Egypt especially to acquire knowledge: e.g., Herodotus, Plato (particularly in Phaedrus and Timaeus), Theophrastus, and Eudoxus of Cnidus (as detailed by Diogenes Laërtius in the 3rd century CE).

Against that background of avid hunger for knowledge among the Greeks, Alexander launched his global enterprise in 334 BCE, which he accomplished with meteoric speed until his untimely death in 323 BCE. His aim throughout had not been restricted to conquering lands as far from Macedonia as India but had been to also explore them. He required his companions, generals, and scholars to report to him in detail on regions previously unmapped and uncharted. His campaigns resulted in a “considerable addition of empirical knowledge of geography,” as Eratosthenes remarked (as reported by Greek geographer Strabo). The reports that Alexander had acquired survived after his death, and they motivated an unprecedented movement of scientific research and study of the Earth, its natural physical qualities, and its inhabitants. The time was pregnant with a new spirit that engendered a renaissance of human culture. It was in that atmosphere that the great library and Mouseion saw the light of day in Alexandria.

The founding of the library and the Mouseion is unquestionably connected with the name of Demetrius of Phaleron, a member of the Peripatetic school and a former Athenian politician. After his fall from power in Athens, Demetrius sought refuge at the court of King Ptolemy I Soter (c. 297 BCE) and became the king’s adviser. Ptolemy soon took advantage of Demetrius’s wide and versatile knowledge and, about 295 BCE, charged him with the task of founding the library and the Mouseion.

The hunt for books
Fabulous stories circulated about the lengths to which the Ptolemies would go in their avid hunt for books. One method to which they reportedly resorted was to search every ship that sailed into the harbour of Alexandria. If a book was found, it was taken to the library for a decision as to whether to return it or to confiscate it and replace it with a copy made on the spot (with an adequate compensation to the owner). Books acquired in that manner were designated “from the ships.”

Another story (reported by Galen in the writings on Hippocrates) reveals how Ptolemy III managed to obtain the original texts of the great dramatic poets Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. The precious texts were safeguarded in the Athenian state archives and were not allowed to be lent out. The king, however, persuaded the governors of Athens to permit him to borrow them in order to have them copied. The enormous sum of 15 talents of silver was deposited in Athens as a pledge for their safe restitution. The king thereupon kept the originals and sent back copies, willingly forfeiting the pledge.

Those irregular methods of collection were supplemented by the purchase of books from different places, especially from Athens and Rhodes, which sustained the largest book markets of the time. Occasionally, the library’s collectors bought different versions of the same work—for example, in the Homeric texts that came “from Chios,” “from Sinope,” and “from Massilia.”

Of languages other than Greek, Egyptian had the largest section. Ptolemy I is said to have encouraged Egyptian priests to accumulate records of their past tradition and heritage and to render them available for use by Greek scholars and men of letters whom he had invited to live in Egypt. Best-known examples from each group were the Egyptian priest Manetho, who had good command of Greek, and the Greek author Hecataeus of Abdera.

Other languages
Beside the bulk of Greek literature and a full corpus of Egyptian records, there is evidence that the library incorporated the written works of other nations. Early in the 3rd century BCE, a Chaldean priest named Berosus wrote (in Greek) a history of Babylonia. His book quickly became known in Egypt and was probably used by Manetho. According to Pliny the Elder, Hermippus in Alexandria wrote a voluminous book on Zoroastrianism. Buddhist writings would also become available, as a consequence of the exchange of embassies between Ashoka and Philadelphus. The translation of the Pentateuch from Hebrew into Greek was a practical necessity for the large Jewish community in Alexandria, already Hellenized by the end of the 3rd century BCE. The translation of the Septuagint was executed piecemeal during the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE, rendered possible in Alexandria because of the abundance of research material available at the library. The Septuagint has survived as the most valuable work in the history of translation and continues to be indispensable to all biblical studies.

Growth of the library
The association of the library with the Mouseion, whose scholars required a reliable resource, helped the library to develop into a proper research centre. Its location close to the harbour and within the royal palace’s grounds placed it under the direct supervision of the kings. Those circumstances aided the rapid growth of the library’s collection. Within half a century of its foundation circa 295 BCE, the collections of the Royal Library had exceeded the space allotted to contain the accumulated books. It was found necessary to establish an offshoot that could house the surplus volumes. To that end, Ptolemy III (246–221 BCE) incorporated the branch library into the newly built Serapeum, which was situated at a distance from the royal quarter in the Egyptian district south of the city.

Estimates of the total number of books in the library vary. The earliest surviving figure, from the 3rd century BCE, is reported as “more than 200,000 books,” whereas the medieval text of John Tzetzes mentions “42,000 books in the outer library; in the inner (Royal) Library 400,000 mixed books, plus 90,000 unmixed books.” A still higher estimate of 700,000 was reported between the 2nd and 4th centuries CE.

Registration and classification of books
Galen preserved the information that was recorded for each book; it included the work’s title, author, and editor as well as its place of origin, length (in lines), and whether the manuscript was mixed (containing more than one work) or unmixed (a single text). It is worth noting that a scribe’s pay was rated according to the quality of writing and number of lines. In an attempt to standardize costs and wages throughout the empire, Diocletian ranked a scribe’s pay as follows:

To a scribe for the best writing 100 lines, 25 denarii; for second-quality writing 100 lines, 20 denarii; to a notary for writing a petition or legal document 100 lines, 10 denarii.

Further, a bibliographical survey of the contents of the library “in every field of learning,” a tremendous undertaking, was entrusted to Greek poet and scholar Callimachus, who was known for his encyclopedic erudition. The result was the Pinakes (“Tables”), which has survived in only a few fragments. Those remains attest to the following divisions: rhetoric, law, epic, tragedy, comedy, lyric poetry, history, medicine, mathematics, natural science, and miscellaneous. Callimachus’s work instantly became a model for future works of a similar nature. Its influence can be traced to the Middle Ages, to its brilliant 10th-century Arabic counterpart, bookseller Ibn al-Nadīm’s Kitāb al-fihrist (“Index”), which has survived intact.

It was mainly because of the Library of Alexandria that the scholars of the Mouseion were able to maintain scholarship at the highest level in almost all areas of learning. In appreciation of their achievements, Vitruvius, in the 1st century CE, expressed the gratitude felt by subsequent generations for the work of the “predecessors” in preserving the

Memory of mankind.…Hence we must render to them indeed the greatest thanks, because they did not let all go in jealous silence, but provided for the record in writing of their ideas in every kind.

The fate of the Library of Alexandria
The fate of that great wealth of books remains provocative and controversial. For centuries the main point of contention was whether or not the library (or libraries—as two sites existed) survived until the Arab conquest of Alexandria in the 7th century. In the 21st century, however, the topic has cooled down, and there is growing agreement among serious scholars that both libraries had both perished long before the Arab conquest. Scholars further believe that there is enough evidence to show that the destruction of the two libraries occurred at different times.

The Royal Library was an unfortunate casualty of war. In 48 BCE Julius Caesar became involved in a civil war in Egypt between Cleopatra and her brother Ptolemy XIII. Caesar sided with Cleopatra and was soon besieged by the Ptolemaic forces by land and sea in the great harbour. He realized that his only chance lay in setting fire to the enemy fleet, and it was by that drastic measure that he managed to gain the upper hand. Yet he is remarkably silent regarding the extent of the destruction caused by the fire in the city itself. Subsequent authors, however, provide details of the ensuing destruction. Most explicit is Plutarch, who, after a personal visit to Alexandria, explained that “Caesar was forced to repel the danger by using fire, which spread from the dockyards and destroyed the Great Library.” Equally indicative is a statement by Strabo who, during a long stay in the city (c. 25–20 BCE), expressed in an indirect manner his regrets over the loss of that great library that had once supplied Eratosthenes and Hipparchus with the original reports of earlier discoveries, sources that were no longer there for him to consult.

The daughter library, protected by the Serapeum, subsisted up to the 4th century as long as paganism survived. But when Christianity became the one and only religion acknowledged throughout the empire, Emperor Theodosius I in his zeal to wipe out all vestiges of paganism issued a decree in 391 sanctioning the demolition of temples in Alexandria. Empowered by the imperial decree, Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria, led an attack on the Serapeum, and he himself gave the first blow to the cult statue of Serapis. His frenzied followers ran amok in the temple, destroying and plundering. When the destruction was complete, Theophilus ordered a church to be built on the site.

Several testimonies written by contemporary or near-contemporary eyewitnesses testify to the fact that the devastation was extensive. One Theodoret claims that “the temple was destroyed to its foundations.” Another witness, Eunapius, mentions in Vita Aedesii that Theophilus and his followers