In order to get the whole picture of Egypt's history, you must visit the Bibliotheca Alexandrina on your Egypt day tours. It previously held the record for the world's largest and most complete library, and it is regarded to have had a significant influence on the evolution of Western philosophy. Although being destroyed today, the Library of Alexandria left behind a lasting impact. The history of libraries and their effects on society will be discussed in this blog article. Along with this, we'll talk about how our Egypt tours might serve as a metaphor for the power of information and education through the library.

One of the biggest and most important libraries in ancient times was the Alexandria Library.It was dedicated to the Muses and housed an impressive collection of scrolls, totaling over half a million volumes. The library was founded by Ptolemy I Soter in the 3rd century BCE, all its historical information will be more relevant and clear during ourEgypt travel package and continued to grow under the patronage of his successors, the Ptolemaic dynasty. Our wonderful day tours in Alexandria are an amazing gate to enable you to discover the greatness of the architectural building of the Bibliotheca Alexandrina.

A larger research facility called the Mouseion, which also had a museum and a school, featured the Library of Alexandria. The Mouseion was open to scholars from all over the world and provided them with accommodation and food while they worked.Due to this, it became one of the most significant educational institutions in antiquity.

Sadly, the Library of Alexandria was destroyed in a series of fires in the 3rd century CE. However, its legacy continues on; it is credited with inspiring many later libraries, including our modern-day library systems. Our tour guide will explain to you more information about the destruction and rebuilding of the Library of Alexandria during your Alexandra day tours.

One of the world's most magnificent collections of books and manuscripts may be found at the Alexandria Library. There are more than 500,000 books in the library's collection, including some of the rarest and most expensive books and manuscripts ever created. Our Egypt classic tour will be remarkable for you if you are a culture vulture who enjoys rare books and archaeological manuscripts.

The library's collection is particularly noteworthy in the areas of science, philosophy, and history. The library features a sizable collection of Herodotus' historical writings from antiquity, as well as a sizable quantity of Aristotle and Plato's philosophical treatises. The library also has a wide range of literature on astronomy, mathematics, and medicine. Considered to be one of wonders in Egypt is the enormous Library of Alexandria.

In addition to its holdings of rare and valuable books, the Alexandria Library is also home to a number of important historical documents. Among these are the original copies of the Iliad and the Odyssey, as well as a number of other works by Homer. The library also holds a copy of the world's oldest surviving map, which was created by the Greek geographer Claudius Ptolemy. Do not forget to have a look at ouryour egypt blogs to know everything updated about the Library of Alexandria.

The Alexandria Library is home to many significant historical documents in addition to its collection of rare and expensive books. Many additional works by Homer are also included, as well as the original editions of the Iliad and the Odyssey. Moreover, the library has a copy of the earliest map still in existence, which was drawn by the Greek cartographer Claudius Ptolemy. Don't forget to check out our your egypt blogs to stay up to speed on all things pertaining to the Library of Alexandria.

The Library, which included a number of structures including the main reading room (the Mouseion), lecture halls, conference rooms, and storage rooms, was located close to the Royal Palace in Alexandria. The Library flourished over the ages thanks to the rich patronage of the Ptolemaic rulers.

Greek volumes made up the majority of the library's collection, but there were also books written in Egyptian, Hebrew, Aramaic, and Persian. The Library drew academics from all over the world and developed into an educational hub. There are several options available to families looking to have a good time on holiday, like going to Alexandria or doing one of our Egypt family tours.

Between the 3rd and 1st centuries BCE, the Library of Alexandria was the largest and most important library in the world. It housed over half a million scrolls and was a center of scholarship for Greek culture. However, the Library was destroyed in a series of fires between 48 BCE and the 6th century CE.
Experience ourEgypt day tours to discover how The Alexandria library burned? The first fire occurred in 48 BCE during the Siege of Alexandria. Julius Caesar had ordered his troops to set fire to Egyptian ships docked in the harbor in order to block them from being used by the enemy. The fire spread to the nearby Library, damaging or destroying many scrolls.
