Djoser, was the second king of the 3rd dynasty (c. 2650–c. 2575 BCE) of ancient Egypt, who undertook the construction of the earliest important stone building in Egypt. His reign, which probably lasted 19 years, was marked by great technological innovation in the use of stone architecture. His minister, Imhotep, a talented architect and physician, was himself deified in later periods.

Ṣaqqārah: Step Pyramid of Djoser

The Step Pyramid of King Djoser at Ṣaqqārah, Egypt, c. 2650 BCE.
Mortuary complex of the Step Pyramid of Djoser, Ṣaqqārah, Egypt.
Djoser probably succeeded his brother to the throne. Through his mother, he was related to the last ruler of the 2nd dynasty (c. 2775–c. 2650). With the help of Imhotep, the king erected a funerary complex at Ṣaqqārah, outside the royal capital, Memphis (southwest of modern Cairo). Built entirely of stone, the innovative structure was a departure from the traditional use of mud bricks along with stone. The greatest advance, however, was a complete alteration of the shape of the monument from a flat-topped rectangular structure (known as a mastaba) to a six-stepped pyramid. Surrounding the Step Pyramid were a large number of limestone buildings intended to represent shrines used for royal rituals. The style of architecture of those buildings reproduced in minutest detail the wood, reed, and brick forms employed in utilitarian construction in Egypt.

The pyramid complex was enclosed by a wall with a single entrance at the southeast corner of the precinct. In response to the internal troubles of the 2nd dynasty, Djoser was the first king to reside exclusively at Memphis, thereby helping to make it the political and cultural centre of Old Kingdom (c. 2575–c. 2130 BCE) Egypt.

Step Pyramid of Djoser, the oldest important stone building in Egypt, the centre of a large mortuary complex in the Ṣaqqārah necropolis. Little is known about the kings of Egypt in the Old Kingdom period, but the pyramids they created were massively impressive statements of their power and wealth, as well as of their immortality. The first of them was this step pyramid, designed for Djoser, second king of the 3rd dynasty, by the world’s first named architect, Imhotep, who is also a key figure in the history of medicine. Imhotep designed the pyramid around the 27th century BCE.

Constructed at a location in the desert outside Djoser’s capital city of Memphis, from where it could be seen dominating the skyline, the pyramid was a translation of earlier Egyptian architecture into stone. Its diminishing six-tier “step” layers of stone and clay rose to a height of about 200 feet (61 m) and were originally covered in gleaming white limestone. The four faces of the pyramid’s square base were generally oriented to the cardinal points. There were numerous gates, but the one true entrance was between columns and led through to the central courtyard.

It is believed that the pyramid held statues of the Egyptian gods and of Djoser himself and members of his family, including a life-sized sculpture of him seated on his throne. Beneath the pyramid was an underground structure of unprecedented size and complexity, with galleries and some 400 rooms.

The pyramid stood in a complex of buildings, some of which were apparently dummies, perhaps meant for the king’s spirit for a time after death or connected with his jubilee ceremonies. On the south side was the marked-out course that each pharaoh would run around during Heb-Sed ceremony at his coronation. There were also tombs for other members of the ruling house. The wall around the complex was more than 1 mile (1.6 km) long and originally 34 feet (11 m) high. The whole site has been described as “a vast city of the dead.”