Siwa oasis is a destination to more than 30 thousand foreign and Egyptian tourists every year and has been ranked among the 9 best sites for solitude on the planet.

Discover with us the natural beauty of Siwa as a tourist place in the first position.

Almost 650 kilometers from Cairo lies the most fascinating of the Western Desert Oasis.

This area is very peculiar: the people of Siwa speak their language, of the Amazigh (Berber) family.

Its unique and particular culture has remained intact also because the area has been isolated from the rest of the country for a long time, the highway to Marsa Matruh was built only in the 80s.

This beautiful and remote oasis is connected with the rest of the country by only two roads: the first part from the capital Marsa Matruh, the second from the Bahariya Oasis.

Situated in a deep depression (18 m below sea level), Siwa is known for the wealth of natural springs, both hot and cold, and the production of high-quality dates.

In addition to the beauty of the landscape, Siwa is home to attractions of particular historical value, including the fortified city, the Temple of Alexander the Great – where the emperor allegedly consulted the famous oracle – and the Temple of Amun.

The Temple of Alexander the Great is located about 48 kilometers east of the Siwa Oasis, at Al-Salam, the remains of the ancient Greek-Roman temple remain.

The Oracle of Amon of the oasis of Siwa is one of the most famous of antiquity.

Alexander the Great would turn to the oracle, questioning him about the fate of his military campaigns and coming out a consecrated son of the divinity (Zeus-Ammon) and the king of Egypt.

This confirmed his divine mission to found a universal empire. Among the illustrious figures in the history of ancient Egypt, Queen Hatshepsut also asked the oracle for advice.

There’re many places you can visit, relax, and warm yourself in Siwa oasis; we recommend that you try them all.

1- Shiatta Lake in Siwa Oasis
This beautiful salt lake surrounded by palm trees is about 60 kilometers west of Siwa, and it is on the edge of the Great Sand Sea and surrounded by salt, and it is beautiful.

People are moving from one place to another stop here to rest, just like flamingos and deer.

2- Fortress of Shali
The ruins of this 13th-century mud-brick stronghold dominate Central Siwa.

The maze of crowded dwellings was once four or five floors high and housed hundreds of people.

A route goes to the summit, past the crumbling ruins of the Old Mosque’s chimney-shaped tower.

Few outsiders were allowed inside the stronghold for centuries, and even fewer survived.

But three days of rain in 1926 did more damage than any invasion, and residents relocated to newer, more comfortable residences with running water and electricity throughout the decades.

Only a few buildings surrounding the perimeter are inhabited or stored. On a route from the central plaza, you can see the oasis.

Several foreigners and Egyptians are renovating properties in the ancient town.

3- Bir Wahed
Bir Wahed is a popular place to visit in Siwa, and it’s about 15 km away on the edge of the Great Sand Sea.

There is a hot spring that is the size of a large jacuzzi at the top of dunes. Sulfurous water bubbles in a pool and runs off to water a garden.

Cooling off in the lake then watching the sunset over the dunes while you soak in a hot spring is a truly unique thing to do.

4- Gebel Al Mawta
People who live in Siwa Town on the north end of the town have a small hill full of rock tombs with paintings on the walls.

You can go to the Gebel Al Mawta mountain, which means “mountain of the dead.” Most of the graves there were built-in 26th dynasty, Platonic, and Roman times.

Its name means “Mountain of the Dead.” Like an oasis in Italy bombed by Italian forces during World War II, people living in the area hid in these tombs, only 1 km from the town center.

It’s the Tomb of Si Amun that has the best paintings. The colorful reliefs show the dead man, who thought to have been a wealthy Greek landowner or merchant, making offerings and praying to Egyptian gods.

The Tomb of Mesu-Isis, which finished, has a beautiful picture of cobras in red and blue above the entrance.

The Tomb of Niperpathot, which ended, has inscriptions and crude drawings in the same reddish ink you can see on modern Siwan pottery.

Finally, the Tomb of the Crocodile, which finished, has a yellow crocodile that looks like the god Sobek.

5- Temple of the Oracle
The 26th-dynasty Oracle Temple is in the northwest corner of the ruins of Aghurmi, which was a village in the area.

It dedicated to Amun, also known as Zeus or Jupiter Ammon, and it was a powerful symbol of the town’s wealth.

It is possible that Amun’s son, Alexander the Great, was named here, too.

There are many stories about the temple’s foundation. Two priestesses sent away from Thebes to live in the desert.

It works: One built the Dodona Temple in Greece and made the Aghurmi Oracle Temple.

It had so much power that some kings wanted to learn from it, while others sent armies to get rid of it.

Even though they poorly rebuilt the buttressed temple in the 1970s, it is still a fascinating historical site. It is possible to see palm trees from here.

6- Fatnas Spring
This Pool is on a small island in the Birket Siwa, which is very salty, and it’s only accessible by walking across a narrow causeway.

The Pool calls “Fantasy Island” because of its beautiful setting.

It’s about 6 km from Siwa Town, and palm trees and lush greenery surround it.

A small cafe hidden among the palm trees, where you can have a cup of tea or smoke some shisha. It’s a great place to watch the sunset.

When the Ministry of Agriculture tried to improve the lake’s drainage, they raised the island to be higher and dry.

It means that at times, the cafe may look out over salty mudflats rather than water from outside.

7- Cleopatra Springs
It will be best if you go to Siwa’s most famous spring if you follow the path from the Temple of the Oracle to the Temple of Umm Ubayd and keep going past it.

You can swim in the crystal-clear water that comes up from beneath the surface.

This large stone pool is popular with locals and tourists alike. They serve soft drinks and tasty snacks, but if you want to stay for a while, you can bring your picnic and stay for a long time.

8- Old Mosque in Siwa Oasis Egypt
The old mosque with its chimney-shaped minaret is located directly above the entrance to the Fortress of Shali.

The mosque recently restored, and there is now a path running from the main square to the gate.

Built with Karshef, a mixture of salt and clay, it is the oldest mosque in the world made with this mixture.

9- Tomb of Si Amun
These beautiful reliefs show the dead man, who thought to be a wealthy Greek landowner or merchant, giving offerings to Egyptian gods and praying.

Gebel Al Mawta’s best work is in this tomb. There is a lovely picture of the sky goddess Nut next to a sycamore tree.

10- Tomb of Mesu-Isis
In Gebel Al Mawta, the unfinished Tomb of Mesu-Isis is interesting because it has a beautiful picture of cobras in red and blue above the door.

It looks like the tomb was still incomplete, and they decorated only one wall.

11- House of Siwa Museum
This small museum has a lot of exciting examples of traditional clothing, jewelry, and crafts from the oasis.

I think it’s worth paying for a ticket to look at the wedding gowns. You can see it from the King Fuad Mosque, and it’s a block to the north.

12- Tomb of the Crocodile
A painting on the wall shows a yellow crocodile that is the god Sobek. This tomb’s name comes from that. Many of the pictures inside are in bad shape.

If you want to go on a desert hike, don’t miss the chance. The locals will make your trip more fun with dune bashing and sandboarding, and they’ll also serve you Bedouin tea in the desert, made of tea leaves and Luisa grass.

If you decide to spend the night in the desert, in the Bedouin camp, which is a very good idea, the locals will make your night even better with traditional songs, music, and dances, after they cook a cheap but tasty meal.

Finally, if you want to “isolate yourself” and enjoy the peace we recommend Taziry Ecovillages Siwa, a sustainable eco-resort built with local materials, without electricity (lit with candles produced by them) where you can taste excellent locally produced food and enjoy a breathtaking view. Don’t forget a mosquito spray though, or you won’t be the only one feasting!

The panorama and landscape around Taziry are breathtaking, to say the least, the building built on the inspiration of the Moroccan Casbahs, but as said, with local materials, including salt for some of the windows, blends in harmony with the indescribable beauty of its surroundings.
