Sesostris III, (flourished 19th century BCE), king of ancient Egypt (reigned 1836–18 BCE) of the 12th dynasty (1938–c. 1756 BCE), who completely reshaped Egypt’s government and extended his dominion in Nubia, the land immediately south of Egypt.

Egypt: crowns
The crown of Lower Egypt (left) and the crown of Upper Egypt (right), both worn by King Sesostris III, Egypt, 19th century BCE; in the Egyptian Museum, Cairo.
During the reigns of his predecessors, the provincial nobles of Middle Egypt had enhanced their power through royal favours and intermarriage with the families of neighbouring potentates. Around the middle of Sesostris III’s reign, the rich provincial tombs, which were a mark of the nobles’ power, abruptly ceased to be built. Simultaneously, the memorials of middle-class persons increased at Abydos, the Upper Egyptian shrine of the popular god Osiris. Sesostris III strengthened the central government, minimizing the power and influence of the feudal nobility. Egypt was divided into four great districts, each of which possessed a hierarchy of officials and scribes directly responsible to the vizier. The vizier possessed a ministry, and countrywide departments of the treasury, agriculture, war, and labour resources were created. These assumed governmental functions and kept strict accounts of income and disbursement. So effective were the reforms that in the following dynasty, in spite of weak rulers, the central government under the viziers continued to function effectively for over a century.

Al-Jizah. Giza Necropolis, Giza Plateau, Cairo, Egypt. Side view of Sphinx with the Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops) rising in the background. The sides of all three of the Giza pyramids are astronomically oriented to be north-south, east-west (see notes)

Egypt, ancient
Sites associated with Egypt from Predynastic to Byzantine times, Thebes region.
Sesostris III’s second great achievement was his overhaul and extension of Egypt’s Nubian possessions. Probably responding to the growing strength of the native Nubian polities of the region, the king conducted four campaigns in which he quelled the nomads and extended the frontier to the southern end of the Second Nile Cataract. He then added to a network of forts within signaling distance of one another, extending from the northern fort at Buhen at the Second Nile Cataract to the new frontier at Semna, where both river traffic and nomads in the desert were screened and observed. Nile inundation heights also were recorded at the forts, giving valuable advance notice to Egypt proper.

Before his first Nubian campaign in year 8 of his reign, Sesostris cut a canal through the First Nile Cataract at Elephantine, thus easing the passage of both military and commercial shipping. Probably after his Nubian campaigns, Sesostris conducted a minor foray into Palestine, defeating a place that may be Shechem. Inscriptions of the king’s officials reveal that miners were busy at Sinai and at several places in Nubia. The king built his pyramid at Dahshūr near that of Amenemhet II but incorporated the innovations of the tomb of Sesostris II.

It was partly the exploits of this king, partly those of his two like-named predecessors, and also the deeds of Ramses II of the 19th dynasty (1292–1190 BCE) that came to figure in the legend of Sesostris that Herodotus recorded. Sesostris III’s memory long outlived him, for he became the patron deity of Egyptian Nubia. Ramses II accounted for the Asiatic conquests of the legend, and the rest was heroic elaboration