Dahshur Necropolis has two of the most preserved pyramids in Egypt, they were built during the reign of King Sneferu (2613-2589 BC), the founder of the fourth dynasty and father of the pharaoh Khufu – Cheops. The curved pyramid and the red pyramid in Dahshur are rich evidence of the architectural development that led to the construction of the Great Pyramid of Khufu and his companions on the Giza plateau.

The Red Pyramid and the Bent Pyramid at Dahshur preceded the Giza Pyramids in their construction. The curved pyramid is called the ‘transition’ pyramid because the angle of its sides abruptly changes about a third of the way up. The second pyramid of Sneferu was the first pyramid with smooth faces ever built, it is also the third-largest pyramid ever built, but the pyramids of Khufu and Khafre, in Giza, overcame it in height.

They are located about 40 kilometers southwest of Cairo, the village of Dahshur marks the southern end of the vast pyramid field that begins in Giza. Excavations at Dahshur revealed the remains of seven pyramids, as well as extensive tomb complexes built for queens and nobles from the ancient capital of Memphis until the thirteenth dynasty of the Middle Kingdom.

From Saqqara, you can see the curved pyramid of Dahshur on the horizon, so much so that you can combine your visit to the two sites in a single day.

1- The Bent Pyramid Or Curved Pyramid at Dahshur
The Bent Pyramid or curved pyramid at Dahshur was built in the late 27th century BC by King Sneferu, father of King Khufu, responsible for the construction of the Great Pyramid of Giza. The curved Pyramid was the first to be built by Pharaoh Sneferu, it was named because it was unfinished and had to be rebuilt, but the king decided to leave it at that. The pyramid is located on the same site as the Red Pyramid, near the necropolis of the city of Dahshur.

Where it is located?
It is located in the Dahshur area about 40 kilometers from Giza and a few kilometers south of the archaeological area of Saqqara.

Who built it?
It is built by Snefru, the first king of the 4th dynasty and father of Cheops, and is perhaps the inventor of the perfect Pyramid.

The shape of the Pyramid
It is the Pyramid of the double slope also known as rhomboidal, the second in chronological order built by Snefru (Cheops’ father) after the failure of the construction of Medium. It is a very particular construction: it is not the classic pyramid shape, in fact, the sides have a double inclination due to the change of design during the work, initially with an inclination of about 54° of the outer walls, but due to possible construction defects, the height was reduced to about half (43°) creating a double inclination. In the original project it should, therefore, have reached a height of 128.5 meters, but after the change of inclination, it reached a height of 105 meters.

Features of the Curved Pyramid:
This pyramid is the best preserved in all of Egypt and you can still see its limestone shining in the sun.
Its height is 105 meters and has a square base whose sides measure 188 meters.
The most striking feature is the curvature that can be seen on its four faces and which responds to a change in the angle of initial inclination, going from 54 ° to 43 °.
The pyramid has two funeral chambers with individual entrances and located on different sides, something unique in the Egyptian pyramids.
The Snefru pyramid is part of a necropolis that includes a funerary temple richly decorated with low reliefs and a small pyramid.
2- The Red Pyramid of Dahshur
The Red Pyramid was another project of Pharaoh Snefru belonging to the fourth dynasty. After the completion of the Rhomboidal Pyramid, also located near the necropolis of Dahshur, Snefru tried to correct the mistakes made during the construction of the pyramid intended for him and that of Meidum, which collapsed during the construction works.

The Red Pyramid, completed at the beginning of the twenty-sixth century B.C., was the first successful attempt to build a real pyramid, directly inspired by the pyramids of Giza in the late fourth dynasty. The apparently crouching position of this structure, compared to that of other pyramids of similar size, is due to the fact that its sides are included in an inclination of 43 degrees.

After the design error that led to a bending of the Rhombic Pyramid, the builders following Snefru presumably decided to build this pyramid using the same inclination that had allowed the completion of the Rhombic Pyramid. The Red Pyramid is 341 feet high.
